introduce Witness into Raft (#31)
tikv/rfcs: text/2019-11-07-raft-witness.md

# Raft Witness

## Summary

> This RFC proposes a new role Witness to Raft, and describes how it could benefit us.

Reviewer: This section should describe a summary of the feature you want to add.

For example:

> Add the Witness role to Raft. Witness roles only store log metadata, not the entries themselves, and allow a cluster to greatly reduce traffic and storage. While this feature can reduce resiliency, it many cases it is desirable to reduce cluster load and energy consumption.

## Motivation

> To tolerate 2 replicas fail, Raft needs 5 replicas, which requires a huge energy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To tolerate 2 replicas failing, traditional Raft needs 5 replicas, this has a huge energy
```

footprint. However, with witness Raft could only need 4 or even 3 replicas to
tolerate 2 fail, and the price is latency becomes higher if some peers are
isolated, or need more time to recover from 2 peers fail. Considering they are not
common cases, we can introduce Witness into Raft.

> ## Dtailed Design

Reviewer 2: Detailed

### The Original Article

Witness is firstly described in this [article][reduce-the-energy-footprint], and is
already implemented in [dragonboat](https://github.com/lni/dragonboat). According to
the article, Witness is like normal Voter in Raft, except

* Witness can't start new elections;
* Leader only replicates metadata (term, index) to Witness without real entries.

So Witness can reduce network traffic and storage usage in a Raft group.

However, there are some issues about about the design. For example (described in the article),
suppose there is a Raft group with Voters `A, B, C, D` and Witness `E`. `A, B, E` can
hold a quorum to commit some entries. But if `A, B` fail, `C, D, E` can't elect a new

> leader forever because `E` will never start new elections, and it will always reject

Reviewer 3: > ...`E` will never start new elections

I don't think the improvement below can solve the issue.

Author: Why not? If `A` and `B` fails, `C` or `D` will start a new election, and the witness `E` won't reject their vote messages. So `C` or `D` must can become new leader.

vote messages from `C, D` because it has a higher *index* or *term*. Even if we can
make `C` or `D` become leader manually (with some external tools), entries committed by
`A, B, E` are still lost, which is fatal for a database.

### Improved

> Considering the issues, this RFC trys to improve the machanism to make it more suitable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Considering the issues, this RFC trys to improve the mechanism to make it more suitable
```

for distribution databases. The design is,

* Witness itself acts totally same as normal Voters;

> * Witness votes voters if they have same index and term;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Witness votes for voters if they have same index and term;
```

> * Witness votes voters if they have same index and term;

Reviewer 3: Why `same`?

Author: The point is `vote for voters`. If 2 voters have same index and term, they will vote for the peer with larger id. However, If a voter and a witness have same index, witness will vote for the voter.

Reviewer 3: So if the candidate has more uptodate index and term, `Witness` will cast rejection?

* Generally, Leader never appends entries to Witness;

> * In some cases, Leader can append entries (NOT ONLY metadata) to Witness.

Reviewer 3: How many entries should be sent to witness?

Author: Generally leader doesn't send anything to witnesses. And progress of witnesses should be in `Probe` state on the leader.  So, If the leader needs to send some entries to a witness, there will be only 1 entry in the first message.

The core principle is leader only try its best to avoid appending to Witness. For example,
suppose there is a Raft group with voters `A, B` and witness `C`, and `A` is the leader.
When A broadcasts new entries to the group, it can ignore the witness `C` if `B` is recently
active.

> To show what it benefits Raft, here are 2 examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To show how it benefits Raft, here are 2 examples:
```

The first is a Raft group with normal voters `A, B, C, D` and a witness `E`. It

> reduces 20% energy footprint and network traffic from the topology with 5 normal voters,

Reviewer: It seems if you save 20% of 5 nodes it means that your reduce the network traffic by a fifth? Doesn't the leader still replicate metadata to the witness?

Author: In my design generally leader won't send replicate metadata to witness. However, heartbeat is kept. So It's less than 20%, I guess.

Reviewer: I would expect it to be quite a bit less, since the network communication still needs to happen :(

but offers almost same availability: If `A, B` fail, `C` or `D` can still be elected
as the new leader, and the new leader must contains all committed entries. It's especially
useful for topology "3 centers in 2 place" if the third center doesn't need to handle
requests locally.

The second is a Raft group with normal voters `A, B, C` and witnesses `D, E`. It
reduces 40% energy footprint and network traffic from the topology with 5 normal voters.

> And if `A, B` fail, C can still be elected as new leader, and then handles read requests

Reviewer 2: C -> `C`

as normal. However new writes won't be handled until `D` and `E` catch up enough raft logs,
which means the Raft group takes more time to recover from 2 node failure.

> ### Swtich between Witness and Voter

Reviewer 2: Switch

As described above, Witness handles appended entries just like normal voters. Although
leader only appends entries to a Witness when too many voters are not active, Witness

> needs to cleanup its local data after those voters become active again. It's easily to

Reviewer 4: Is the cleanup really necessary? It might be better to keep it since the witness could become a voter.

do with an external timer, so we don't need to cover it in Raft.

## Drawbacks

* Write latency could increase if some voters stall.
  In the second example above, the write latency depends on the slowest peer in `A, B, C`,
  however, in the topology with 5 normal voters, it depends on the fastest 3 peers. But
  because Witness reduces 40% energy footprint, it could not be a problem in practice.
* Recovery is slow if some voters fail.
  Under the topology with 5 normal voters, the Raft group needs about 2 election timeout
  to recover from 2 node failure. But in the second example above, it needs all Witnesses
  catch up logs to be available again for writes. It could be a long time in a multi Raft
  system.

> [reduce-the-energy-footprint]: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/280091830_Reducing_the_Energy_Footprint_of_a_Distributed_Consensus_Algorithm.

Reviewer: You are missing the "Alternatives" and "Unresolved Questions" sections from https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/blob/master/template.md#alternatives
